# Elimination Theory

## References
(Book) https://math.berkeley.edu/~bernd/cbms.pdf

(Video) https://youtu.be/cv14Y_6AvVM?si=mcR_7p3oNde6Jh_w

## Big idea
The geometrical operation of projection corresponds to the algebraic operation of eliminating variables

Q: **Why** would we want to do this? 
A: Lower dimensionality of a problem!

### Caveat 
The projection of a polynomial map might not be the image of a polynomial map

Solution: Take the closure

## Elimination and notation
You have a set of s variables that you like, Save variables
You have a set of t variables you want to eliminate, Throw away
Say R is the polynomial rinf in x_1..x_s, and y_1,..,y_t

For any ideal I, the **Elimination ideal** is

J = I intersect (ring only in x variables)

Exercise 1: Prove J is an ideal!

## Implicitization 
Special case of elimination!
For a polynomial map ff from KK^s to KK^t
The graph (as in the calculus sense) is the subset of KK^s x KK^t given by
y_1 = f_1(x_1..x_s)
..
y_t = f_t(x_1..x_s)

Q: Can we find and **implicit** description for this geometric object independent from the y variables?

Q-elimination: Is there a set of equations in the x's alone that describes the (closure) of the image of the polynomial map?

Q-comp: Can we eliminate the y's from the ideal
(y_1 - f_1,.., y_t - f_t)?

## How do we eliminate?
TLDR: Lex or other dictionary orders!

### Slightly longer version
Variables that we want to keep should come first (cheap)

Variables that we want to get rid of come last (expensive)

### Why?
Use an "Elimination Order" that makes the y variables very expensive, and so they get stuck in trailing terms 
(if possible)
if there is some polynomial only in the x's in the ideal, they are cheap and so they will lead

So the gb with this order will find the polys only in the x's 
because they  will need to be there to generate the ideal of leading terms

### THM
If G lex gb for xx < yy in the polynomial ring in x's and y's, then 

G'= G intersect ring in ONLY x's 

is lex gb for Elimination ideal!

Exercise 2: Prove it!

## Application
Consider the action of a finite group G on a polynomial ring R given by linear change of variables.
So g.f(xx)=f(A_g xx) for A_g some matrix depending on g and xx the vector (x_1, ... x_n)

A polynomial is invariant under the action of g if g.f=f

We call f invariant if g.f=f for all g in G. Constants are always invariant, the "boring" ones.

Hilbert Ideal = ideal generated by all positive degree invariants.

Q: Can we find generators for the Hilbert Ideal?

A: Consider the **graph of the action** A_G, the union of the graphs of the maps A_g for all g in G. 
Note that this is a collection of linear subspaces, as each matrix is a linear map. 

Notice that here we are cosidering yy = A_g xx as the equations in the implicitization problem.

THM (Polynomial)

J = (I(A_G) + (yy)) intersect polynomial ring in the x variables

is the Hilbert Ideal!

THM (Exterior)

J' = (I'(A_G) + (yy)) intersect exterior algebra in the x variables

is the Hilbert Ideal!









